Okay, hi everybody.
Welcome to 1.1.5 FireWire In-Depth.
This is a gigantic room,
so feel free to come forwards if
you want to be a little closer.
We have a lot of material to cover today,
so let's get started.
This session is all about writing
software for FireWire devices,
obviously in Mac OS X.
We're going to have a very detailed
look at the software architecture,
how all the parts fit together
and what they do for you.
We will specifically identify things that
we've added since last year that you can
now use in your software development.
And then we'll look at things
that we're still working on,
things that we are going to be
adding in the future to expand
even further the capabilities
of what you can do on FireWire.
Also, this year we've added a section
on how-to organized by device.
So if you've got some device and
you want to know how to get started,
we'll list all the different
options that you have.
The slides are divided
into five categories.
The first is probably the longest,
a detailed study of how all the
FireWire parts in Mac OS X work.
Then, specifically list the changes to
FireWire since WWDC last year.
Then we cover the
planned future services,
do that how-to section
that I talked about,
and we'll wrap up with a brief review
of all of the developer services that
we have available to help you develop
products using FireWire on Mac OS X.
Plus, we'll leave plenty of time for Q&A.
Okay, in Mac OS X,
FireWire is a kernel service.
There's a variety of reasons why
FireWire belongs in the kernel,
but one that by itself is good enough
is that to boot from a FireWire disk,
FireWire would have to be in the kernel
because of the chicken and egg problem.
So it's in there.
FireWire is in the kernel in the
form of I/O kits architecture,
so it leverages all of the
I/O Kit services that other
family interfaces provide,
like USB, SCSI, and so on.
So lots of stuff it has in
common with other services.
It's implemented as a
set of kernel extensions.
We will go over what those
are and what they do.
Now, having just explained that it's in
the kernel because it has to be there,
most of this presentation will
be explaining how you can write
your software out in user space
instead of writing in the kernel.
There's lots of advantages
to working in user space,
and for most of you,
we believe we've provided the services
that will make it possible to do that.
So we'll talk about that at length.
I'm going to show a diagram
of the core FireWire services.
We're going to start at
the bottom with hardware.
From a FireWire point of view,
that's where everything begins.
If there is no FireWire hardware,
then our software isn't
running and nothing happens.
So at the bottom of the diagram,
this item marked hardware,
that represents the FireWire
interface in a Macintosh system.
There could be more than one,
but we'll just focus on one at a time.
Specifically, in 1394 terms,
the interface consists
of a link and a PHY.
These won't be covered in
detail because they're hardware,
but the link is the part that
knows how to form packets.
It does checksums.
It does DMA.
The PHY is the counterpart that knows how
to actually wiggle the wires around in
order to send data serially on the cable.
So the two together form the
FireWire interface that backs up the
ports that you see on our products.
So when I/O Kit discovers that
the Mac has a FireWire port
by looking for PCI devices,
the discovery of that hardware triggers
all of the processes that follow.
By the way, that interface could be...
It could be a PCI card.
It could be a Cardbus card.
It could also be the built-in FireWire
that we now have in our CoreLogic chipset
on all of our currently shipping systems.
For all of these,
they would all load the same way,
and they would all use the same software.
So when I/O Kit finds that hardware,
it starts a process of filling
in the core FireWire services,
which will be shown in this box.
And then we're going to build
a bunch of other services up on
top of that as the diagram grows.
Strictly speaking,
the part that loads first is the device
driver for the hardware interface itself.
In most cases, this is Apple FW-OHCI.
That's the open host
controller interface.
It corresponds to a PCI or PCI-like,
such as Cardbus, interface link chip
found in the hardware.
This is the driver that takes interrupts,
programs the DMA, handles physical to
virtual memory issues.
It does all of the lowest level
software work for controlling the
FireWire hardware so that we can
send and receive packets and do
interesting things on the bus.
The layer above that, that gets loaded in
response to OHCI loading,
is IOFireWire family.
Technically, this should really be
labeled IOFireWireController,
but I've labeled it as Family because
the Family is the kernel service
that binds all of this together and
collectively provides these services.
The family is the common layer for
all of the things using FireWire,
to multiplex through.
For example,
the FireWire bus may have many
different devices connected to it.
Many different drivers and
applications may be loaded that
want to talk to those devices.
But there's only one hardware interface,
so they're all going to have to share.
They all have to peacefully
coexist and do their thing
without stepping on each other.
So the family's job is to provide that
multiplexing point where everybody
can use the bus in their own way,
but do it in a cooperative way.
The family provides additional
services that are bus general,
such as scanning for new devices,
in order to start the
process of loading drivers.
As the family finds devices
on the FireWire bus,
it creates IO FireWire device objects.
There's one of these created
for each node on the FireWire
bus that has a configuration
ROM that we're able to read.
Most nodes fall into this category.
The exception would be, there's two.
You could have a FireWire hub.
In FireWire,
the hubs are like Ethernet hubs.
They're completely
self-configuring and self-active.
They don't require drivers.
They don't require
software to turn them on.
So a FireWire hub on the bus wouldn't
create IO FireWire device because we
wouldn't find any config ROM in it.
The second exception would be some
FireWire device that is turned off,
and so it's acting like a hub.
For example, our G4 tower,
if you turn it off,
its FireWire chips are all turned off,
except for the PHY,
which continues to run from AC power.
That's so that if you've plugged in
two devices like a camera and a TV,
they can still talk to each other through
the hub that's acting in that PHY,
even though the computer's turned off.
That would be a case of a device
where it is a node on the bus,
but nobody can read a
configuration ROM from it,
so we would not create an
IO FireWire device object for that.
Then, for the devices where we do
find a configuration ROM,
we create IOFireWireUnit.
This is the object that represents
a unit directory discovered
in the configuration ROM.
Most devices will have at least one.
Occasionally,
a device might have more than one.
And that corresponds to a unit directory.
The unit directory in the
configuration ROM expresses the
first level of information about
what actual function some device has.
So this is the layer at which things
start to differentiate into disks or
camcorders or printers or something else.
So those four together form the
core FireWire services because
within this box we haven't done
anything that's device-specific.
Nothing was specific to
DV or to hard drives.
It's all just generic FireWire
services supporting multiplexing
of various devices and drivers and
supporting the discovery of the
first level of device functions.
We'll come back to this and
build on it a great deal,
but first let's review
what those services were.
We'll start with IO FireWire
family because that's,
as I said, that's the part that really
brings everything together.
The family makes everybody get along.
All the drivers,
all the devices can share a
single interface onto the bus
and all do their thing without
even knowing about each other.
For example, with iMovie,
you could be capturing DV video
from a FireWire camcorder,
recording it onto a FireWire
hard drive on the same bus.
Both will be sending packets
furiously to accomplish their thing,
but they don't have to
know about each other.
The family keeps them separate and
makes sure they each do their own thing.
For example, iMovie is not bothered
with hard drive packets,
and the hard drive isn't bothered
with commands for the camcorder.
They just don't see each other.
In addition to keeping everyone
playing well on the bus,
the family does the bus scanning.
So if a new device is plugged in,
the family will come along and
look at it and see what it is,
create the device and the unit objects,
and then let the matching start.
Driver matching is listed there.
It's not really done by the family.
The family enables it.
The family finds the information
that will be needed for matching,
but then it hands it over to I/O Kit,
so the matching happens just
like any other I/O device
in the kernel in Mac OS X.
The family handles
GUID and topology tracking.
We'll talk more about GUIDs later,
but this means as devices are
added to or removed from the bus,
the family keeps track
of where they went,
so that if the user is
rearranging the bus,
we don't lose track of some disk,
for example,
and suddenly unmount its file system.
We can keep track of the devices
even though the bus has hot
plugging activity going on.
And the last item,
perhaps the most important,
packet transmit and receive.
The family is the funnel for
all packet activities between
drivers and their devices.
I mentioned driver matching and loading.
FireWire doesn't do its own
driver loading or matching.
FireWire just gathers information
about the devices by reading their
configuration ROMs and publishes
this information in the I/O registry.
Then FireWire asks I/O Kit to activate
its general matching service to find
drivers to load for these devices
that were discovered on the bus.
And this may be an iterative process if,
in doing so, more information is
learned about the devices.
So this means that your matching
mechanism is very flexible.
I/O Kit allows, for example,
active probing.
A driver can run,
take a look at the device and
make a decision on the spot as
to whether it's really the best
choice for that device or not.
So this is really more powerful and more
flexible than what we had in Mac OS 9.
It's also more uniform because the
actual mechanism is shared with USB,
ATA, SCSI, PCI,
all kinds of other interfaces.
Some of the information that we
put in the IO Registry is the GUID,
which I mentioned before.
That stands for Globally Unique ID.
It's a 64-bit serial number
that we read from the device.
This lets us tell one
device from the next.
For example,
if the customer has connected
four FireWire hard drives,
perhaps they want to make a RAID,
they might be identical in every way,
except they have different GUIDs.
And this way we can be sure we're
sending each packet to the right drive,
because nothing would work if
we lost track of who was who.
Additionally, we find a vendor ID,
model name.
In fact,
we take usually the entire configuration
ROM and just put that in the I.O.
registry to make it easy to access.
Finally,
the family scans for unit directories,
that was the top object in
the modules I showed you,
and creates an entry in
IO registry for each one of those.
The unit directory is where
we get the first indication of
protocol information for a device,
which gives us a hint as to what drivers
to load or how to take a closer look
at the device to really learn what
it does and what the best driver is.
At the very bottom of the software stack,
we had Apple FW-OHCI.
On a couple of very old
machines that we do support,
the blue and white G3 and the very
first G4 towers that had PCI graphics,
we have an earlier generation
FireWire chip called PCI-LINX.
So we do support that in Mac OS X.
On those systems,
you'd find a driver called
Apple LINX instead of Apple FW-OHCI.
But those two drivers both provide the
same service interface up to the family,
so there's no hardware-specific
knowledge past that point.
So, except for those systems,
everything else uses Apple FW-OHCI,
and that includes all the
products that we sell today.
OHCI stands for
Open Host Controller Interface.
It's the industry standard interface.
It's the only interface that we
have for a FireWire controller,
at least in a personal computer.
And there's lots of vendors that
provide good quality OHCI silicon,
such as on PCI cards and CardBus cards.
By the way,
if you are going to use an add-in card,
for example, in one of our older G3s
that doesn't have FireWire,
use OHCI and be sure that you've selected
one that fully complies with both the
OHCI standard and the 1394 standard.
This is not a level at which we
tolerate bugs because there's lots of
perfectly good controllers out there.
This is also the only part
of the stack that is not in
Darwin and not open-sourced.
The OHCI driver has to
be shared by everybody.
The camera driver, the disk driver,
scanners, printers,
anything that's on the bus.
That means it's a really bad place
to try to insert custom functionality
for your particular application.
There's better places to do that.
Okay,
the next section is additional services.
I talked about the core that were not
specific to any device or protocol.
Now we're going to look at the
additional services that we provide
for the most common kinds of device and
protocol on top of the core services.
First of all is the FireWire user client.
Strictly speaking,
this should be called a device interface,
but we've gotten stuck
on the name user client,
so we just use both.
This is a way for application-level
software to talk directly to FireWire.
It's not protocol-specific,
it just exports the basic
commands like send a packet,
allocate some address space,
read the configuration ROM.
That exists in a package
called iofirewirelib.plugin.
We also provide a family for SBP-2.
That stands for Serial Bus Protocol.
It's the protocol used by mass
storage devices on FireWire,
most printers,
all scanners that I know of,
some still cameras.
It is the high performance optimized
protocol that takes advantage
of FireWire's architecture to
get really high performance.
This is provided in the kernel because,
as I said, it's used for storage,
so we would have to have it
to boot from a FireWire disk.
But there's a user client that
exports all of the same services
out into application space.
So those two parts are listed there.
The other major protocol
on FireWire is AVC,
the Audio Video Command Protocol.
We have a family for that in the
kernel as well as a user client.
And the names and the
architecture are similar to SBP.
Though AVC is used for
things like DV cameras,
TVs, DVD players, and so on.
So as you probably noticed,
our motto is everything
has a user client.
Even though all of our
services are in the kernel,
we've made everything
available out in user space.
So it should really be possible
for most of you to do all of
your development in user space.
And if you've tried it already,
you know this, it's much easier doing
this in user space.
If you have some problems with your
driver at first and it crashes,
you'll take out an application.
The system will survive.
The debugging tools for user space
are much more convenient to use.
And if you're doing iterative
development on your driver or your app,
you can reload it,
rerun it as many times as you like,
rather than rebooting
the computer every time.
So we've done a lot of work
to make it possible for you to
write software in user space.
That should be your target.
If you find that you think you
need to work in the kernel,
talk with us, because you can,
but maybe you've overlooked something
or we've overlooked something.
And there's a way to do that.
do what you need to do
in user space instead.
Now, let's go back to the picture.
There's the core services.
Now we're going to fill in all the
additional things that I've talked about
so you can see how they fit together.
We're going to need more room,
so I'm going to simplify the names
and now I'm going to push things
around so I can build on it.
You can see I've added a number and
a letter to the device and the unit.
We're going to have more of those.
Let's start with the simplest case.
An application that wants to talk
directly to a FireWire device using
the plain user-client interface.
It's not SBP, it's not ABC,
or for some reason you don't
want to use those layers,
you just want direct access.
Your application runs way up
in the clouds in user land.
And your application loads the
FireWire lib that we showed earlier.
The lib knows how to establish
a connection with the kernel,
crossing, here it is,
the user kernel boundary.
And as a result, in the kernel,
the user client gets loaded and opened
as a driver for the unit in that device.
Now your application can use
the APIs in the FireWire lib
to communicate on FireWire.
From application space.
The user client is really just
a pass-through driver that knows
how to move your commands and
data in and out of the kernel.
Let's suppose that your device
actually is a multi-function device,
and in addition to Unit A,
which is doing some custom thing
that you talk to from an application,
you also have a Unit B.
And let's say that this unit represents
just an ordinary disk drive function.
We would have discovered that the unit
directory indicated the SBP-2 protocol.
So in the kernel,
the SBP-2 family loads against
this part of the device.
The first part of that, SBP-target,
represents the unit directory itself.
And every SBP device has
at least one logical unit,
occasionally more than one.
That's represented by an SBP-LUN object.
I said this case was a disk drive.
Disk drivers are in the kernel,
so that will have been loaded
by I/O Kit right there in
the kernel doing its thing.
So here you can see a case of a
single FireWire device where we have
one driver running in the kernel,
an application running out in user space.
They're both able to hook into the
device and do their thing without
interfering with each other.
Let's add another device
to the FireWire bus.
It will have a single unit.
This will also be an SBP device,
but let's say it's a scanner.
The SBP services still load in the
kernel because that's where they exist.
The scanner has a logical unit.
But now you come along and
you run some application,
say Photoshop, up in application space.
But rather than open the
all-purpose FireWire lib,
we can use a much more appropriate API,
which is the SBP-2 user client.
So the lib is the part of that
that lives in application space.
And when it gets opened,
it establishes a connection with its
corresponding user client in the kernel,
which acts as the driver for that device.
Now the application can
communicate with the scanner,
again running all of its
logic up in user space,
using the kernel just as a
transport to move stuff in and out.
of the device.
Finally, let's connect a device
that is a DV camcorder.
Again, it has a unit directory
indicating the AVC protocol.
So, we load the AVC family
corresponding to that.
Something new I'll talk about later
is that we now do subunit enumeration,
so we will create a subunit
corresponding to the camcorder's
specific functionality.
Now,
an application like iMovie comes along.
Through QuickTime,
it opens up the AVC lib
out in user space,
which hooks into the AVC user
client and is able to directly
send device control commands,
for example, to the camera.
It doesn't fit in the picture,
but in the iMovie QuickTime case,
there's actually also a connection
to the plain FireWire user client,
which is how the isochronous data,
the real-time DV,
is captured or exported.
So, it's a very flexible architecture.
So, as you can see from this figure,
This should re-emphasize the point that
everything's available in user space,
but it also shows something else.
What we have in user space is just
glue that hooks into the kernel.
If you look at the center two columns,
we have a disk driver
running in the kernel,
and we have a scanner running
out in application space,
but they're both using the
same SBP family in the kernel,
so there's not a separate or second
SBP implementation in user space.
There's just one, and it's in the kernel,
so it's always going
to work the same way.
So that helps keep things simple,
even though you have the
flexibility to access it from
the kernel or from user space.
Okay, there's more, but it won't fit,
so let's unplug two devices.
You didn't see it earlier,
but this was actually here all along.
There just wasn't room.
In addition to creating device
objects for every device on the bus,
we will always have one local node
object attached to the family.
Essentially,
this represents the Mac itself.
The Mac is also a node
on the FireWire bus,
but it doesn't discover itself as a
device or load a driver for itself.
Instead,
we just create this local node object
as a place where you can hook in if you
want to talk to FireWire in general,
rather than talking to one
of the devices in particular.
Suppose you had an application that wants
to show a picture graphically depicting
the objects on the FireWire bus.
That application would like
to receive the topology map.
It might like to read the
configuration ROMs on the devices.
It might even do some further
dialogue with the devices.
You can run that application
out in user space,
use the plain FireWire lib.
It will trigger the user client
to get hooked into the local node.
Now you can do anything that you could
do to an ordinary FireWire device,
but you can do it in a bus-general way.
The local node is there even if there
are no devices on the FireWire bus.
Your application won't be showing
a very interesting picture,
but you can still run and talk to the bus
without having somebody else out there.
So it's very general.
It means that you don't have to
track down some random device on
the bus and try to talk through it.
If you did that,
you might lock out the driver
that's trying to use that device.
So the local node provides a second
path in where you can access FireWire
without getting in anybody else's way.
Okay,
now let's look at some of the things
we've changed since last year.
We covered these at a
high level on Monday.
I'm going to go into more
detail about them today.
SCSITaaskUserclient.
This is the answer to about half the
questions we get on our mailing list.
There's a lot of devices out
there that on FireWire use SBP-2,
but architecturally
they are SAM compliant.
That's the SCSI architecture model.
This includes things like CD-ROM burners,
printers, scanners,
certain still cameras.
It's been possible to access
these devices through the SBP-2
family in the kernel or the SBP-2
user client in application space.
But that exposed you to a lot of
1394 details that may not have
really been interesting if you
just wanted to control your device.
The SCSITaaskUserClient, in general,
is a much better way to
access these devices.
Now,
this was just finished last year at WWDC,
but it's really only become available
well into the year since then.
So it wasn't really possible to
ship things on it a year ago.
If you have a device of this
type and you haven't already
looked at SCSITaaskUserclient,
this is probably what
you should be using.
It's very high level.
You can ignore logins, reconnects,
bus resets.
You can concentrate on picking
commands to send to your
device to make it do its thing,
rather than worrying about
the FireWire details.
On our mailing list,
almost everybody who we send
off to SCSITaaskUserclient,
they report back that that's what they
wanted and they stop asking about SBP-2.
Another thing where we've made
big changes since last year is the
isochronous services in the user client.
If you're new to FireWire,
isochronous is the word that describes
real-time transfer on FireWire,
such as the capturing
of DV from a camera.
The opposite is asynchronous,
which is the kind of traffic we
use for FireWire disk drives.
It's not real-time,
it just happens at any time,
thus asynchronous.
The user client now is very capable
of doing isochronous transfers,
so you don't have to go into
the kernel to accomplish that.
You can send and receive these
real-time streams using DCLs.
DCL is Data Stream Command Language.
It's an abstract DMA program
that allows you to describe your
real-time transfer at a very
fine-grained packet-by-packet level.
It's done this way because the
FireWire real-time transfer sends or
receives 8,000 packets per second.
So you don't want to be calling
some API 8,000 times a second
to send or receive a packet.
Instead, you write this DMA program
in advance and turn it on,
and it runs at 8,000 packets per second,
periodically updating you,
saying that it has produced data or it
needs to be refilled with more data.
The same thing worked in Mac OS 9.
Largely, you can copy your programs
directly from Mac OS 9 to Mac OS X.
There's minor changes,
such as in the way the timestamps work,
but nothing that should
force you to re-architect.
Very importantly,
even if your DCL is running,
even if you're using the user client,
your DCL itself runs in the kernel.
And all of your memory is used directly.
It's mapped right into the DMA.
So even though you're
out in application space,
there's no penalty copying
data out of the kernel.
The performance can be just as
good as what you get in the kernel.
In our SDK,
there is sample code for the IIDC,
also known as DCAM, type of web camera,
such as the iBot or the ADS Pyro.
We, as we talked about Monday and
I think is coming up,
we have a much better driver
that we're including in Jaguar,
but this sample code should be a
very good start for writing DCLs
and learning how to control them.
It's not such a good sample
for how to fit into QuickTime,
but it's a good sample of
how to work with FireWire.
Another thing we've made a
lot of changes in since last
year is the AVC user client.
Last year it was really just a
stub that iMovie could hook into,
but it wasn't general purpose.
Now we have made it fully the equal of
the services available in the kernel,
and to prove this, in Jaguar,
we are moving the DV driver itself
out of the kernel into user space.
This shows that we can
get frame accurate,
30 frame per second
DV capture over long periods,
suitable for not just iMovie,
but Final Cut Pro,
with our driver running in user space.
So if you're not convinced
that this is a good idea,
take a look at what we've done,
because it really works pretty well.
Additionally,
the ABC User Client Support, well,
FCP is really strictly
what this should be called.
The Function Control Protocol is
the bottom part of ABC.
It defines how to send and receive
these commands in 1394 packets.
ABC defines higher level things,
such as what the commands are and
associated things that work with them,
like the next bullet.
So if you're looking for FCP,
it's in here.
Significantly,
we've added that you can now
either send or receive these.
You can send AVC commands and
receive responses from some device,
like controlling a camera,
or you can receive AVC commands from
some device and send responses to those.
For example, if you wanted to implement a
virtual camera or TV on your Mac.
Also in the ABC UserClient is
access to plug control registers.
The ABC spec defines these 32-bit
registers at a certain fixed address.
These registers contain information
about active isochronous
communication to or from a device.
So any two devices exchanging
data will have corresponding
sets of plug control registers.
The register indicates
what channel it's on,
how fast it's going,
how many people are listening to it.
So to be fully compatible with AVC,
you need these,
and it's now possible to allocate them
and use them in the AVC user client.
CMP, shown there,
is Connection Management Protocol.
That's the series of procedures that
you perform on plug control registers
to set up and tear down connections.
As I showed in the big diagram,
we now enumerate subunits in AVC devices.
AVC, the designers really didn't,
they weren't into the spirit of 1394.
They have a config
ROM with a unit directory,
but only because they had to.
They don't put information in
there about what the device does.
Instead, you have to inquire using an
AVC command to ask the device,
hey, what do you really do?
So, since all AVC devices need
that in order to get anywhere,
we provide that standard.
And we publish the information
in the I/O registry.
So, it's similar to what SBP does
in picking protocol information
out of the config ROM.
It just comes from a different place.
But it leads to the same thing.
You can use the information in
I/O registry to further match and
discover what the device does.
Finally, we've added something called
asynchronous connections.
This is sort of a poor man's SBP-2.
It's a serial transport for
moving blocks of asynchronous
data within the framework of AVC.
It's not very fast.
It's somewhat clunky compared to SBP-2.
But if your main thing is DV and you
also want to move some still images,
it's good enough.
So, we support that.
There are cameras coming out that use it,
for example, for still image transport.
It's there,
but it shouldn't be your first choice.
If someone's already made a
device and it requires this,
fine, go ahead and use it.
If you're designing something new,
you should really look to SBP-2
instead if you want good performance.
Speaking of which, in SBP-2,
those really old Macs
I described earlier,
the blue and white G3
and certain G4 towers,
use an earlier generation
FireWire controller.
One of the reasons we aren't shipping
that anymore is that it had a tendency
to underflow when transmitting packets.
In other words,
we would ask it to send a packet,
and it would start sending the packet,
and then in the middle,
it would run out of data,
and the packet would be damaged.
That triggers what's called
"ac data error" on the bus.
It's not fatal,
the device can recover from it,
but the device will recover a lot
faster in some cases if we retry
the packet without being asked.
So, Mac OS 9 did that.
We have changed SBP-2 in Mac OS X,
so it will do that too.
So,
the performance on those older machines
should now be completely the same.
We've added a bunch of stuff that
is exclusive to Mac OS X in SBP-2.
We've added a flag called "Fails on
ACK Busy." You shouldn't set this
flag without knowing what it does,
but in congested situations,
some devices will get better performance
if we pace their I/Os a little bit more
and take some steps to avoid ACK Busy.
So, for best possible performance,
the disk driver, for example,
will set this flag when it's appropriate.
Most people won't need to set it,
you'll just notice higher
performance from your drives.
Physical orbs.
This is pretty esoteric SPP2 stuff.
We've added the option,
you have a flag to control this,
to use physical memory for your orbs
rather than FireWire virtual memory,
also known as a pseudo-address space.
This takes out one interrupt in
the processing of an orb because
the FireWire OHCI controller can
respond to the device automatically,
that's why it's called physical,
rather than sending the
request up to software.
Depending on the dynamics of your I/Os,
you may see a 5% increase in disk
speed when this is turned on.
So we will be using
this in our disk driver.
If you're doing a
high-performance device,
you may want to turn this on.
For a low-performance device,
you may want to leave this off because if
you're debugging with a packet analyzer,
it's much easier to spot the
orbs on the bus if they're
non-physical because the addresses
are very regular and easy to see.
A related change to orbs is
unlimited page table size.
The page table for an SBP-2 orb
has to be physically contiguous.
So in Mac OS 9,
we limited it to 4 kilobytes,
and that limit carried
over in Mac OS X until now.
If you have a gigantic orb,
which might be used, say,
by a scanner that's going to scan a 100
megabyte page with a single command,
we will now use a pseudo-address space
to write out the entire page table,
no matter how large it is,
so that you can get basically
unlimited transfer size in any orb.
It will be slightly slower because
it's the opposite of physical orbs.
The page table accesses are
now going through software.
But for something like a scanner
that's probably not sacralized...
...or that's not saturating the bus,
you'll probably prefer to have
unlimited transfer size rather
than 1% more performance that the
scanner probably wouldn't use.
Finally, in SBP-2,
we've added an automatic
retry feature for logins.
There are some cases in which
you need to try a few times
to get logged into a device.
Rather than forcing every driver
to do it in their own way,
we've added an optional
feature to do it for you.
And there's a configurable delay
so that if your device needs a
little time to think about it,
we can accommodate that.
Since last year, we have distributed five
new SDKs for Mac OS X.
Each one of these contains
the latest binaries,
the latest sample code,
the latest source code,
all the documentation that we have,
all the tools that we have.
We're now working to integrate that
with the Mac OS X developer tool
CD so that everybody will have it,
whether they go looking for it or not.
But it will continue to be available
for download on our website,
where you can get the very latest.
It's always been free public download.
You don't have to sign up for anything.
The SDKs are the biggest
product for you guys,
the developers,
that comes out of this team.
So we spend a lot of time on that.
Consequently,
we'd love to get your feedback,
especially at the feedback forum tomorrow
or today during Q&A if there's time.
What in there is helpful to you?
What is not helpful?
What do you just not understand?
What can we do to make those better?
Because we spend a lot of time on those.
One thing we've done since last year
is added a lot of HeaderDoc into the,
well, it's in the SDK and it's
also in all the files.
Almost 100 classes, methods,
and so on documented.
This calls out some of the highlights.
So hopefully this makes
things a bit more clear.
I mentioned it on Monday,
we also have a whole new
book on user clients.
There's a link in here for that.
As I mentioned on Monday,
we have a new driver
for IIDC type cameras,
also known as DCAM.
It's very high performance,
it's much better than what we had
in the sample code in the SDK.
Now we'll go through some of the
things that we're still working on,
things that we'd be interested
in working with you on over the
next few months or the next year.
There's a lot of interest in IP1394.
This is the internet protocol,
commonly known as TCP/IP,
though that's not completely accurate.
There is a standard in as much as
the IETF ever standardizes anything,
which means there's an
RFC available on the web.
You can go to IETF.org and pick up
RFC 2734 and it shows how to transport
the internet protocol on FireWire.
It's not super complicated.
Basically, you send an ARP packet to find
out somebody else who's out there,
just like on Ethernet.
And what you get back is a
FireWire address of a FIFO,
where you can send packets
for a particular device.
[Transcript missing]
Here's a picture that shows how
the IP1394 datagram is formed.
It's encapsulated in
a block write packet.
The top half of the picture
shows the standard block write
header for a packet on 1394,
including its address,
so that FIFO high and FIFO low
are the address that was
returned from the ARP process.
Then the payload portion of the packet
simply has a 32-bit encapsulation header
that covers things like IP fragmentation,
followed by an IP datagram,
which can be of variable sizes.
So it's really pretty straightforward.
We're also doing active
work on audio for FireWire.
This generally means ISO 61883,
which defines the transport from moving
audio data in real time across FireWire.
In case you haven't figured this out,
the FireWire we have today at S400 can
carry 400 channels of CD quality music,
or any kind of audio.
So there's tremendous potential
there for audio applications.
We are working on supporting the
audio subunit and the music subunit,
both of which are part of AVC,
supporting MIDI over this transport,
and providing services
for SMPTE timecode.
If you're interested in
developing drivers for this,
we have more to talk about,
so please get in contact with us.
We're also spending some time on 1394b.
As I described Monday,
this standard is finished.
It's been published by the IEEE,
or it's being published.
Almost all of the changes
for 1394b are in the PHY.
This spec was designed by
a lot of software people,
so they put all the
changes in the hardware.
My hat's off to them.
It's very unlikely you'll have
to change anything in software.
We have to change a few things in
the family and the OHCI driver.
For example, simply to program the DMA to
transmit at higher speeds,
we have to program in some
different speed codes.
The packets can be larger in 1394B
so that we get high performance.
For asynchronous, that's limited to 4K.
I'll show a table on the next slide.
We have to allocate some
more buffer memory because if
things are going twice as fast,
we may get twice as much stuff
piled up before we can sort it out.
And we have some work to do in
sorting out the topology of the
devices based on the self-ID packets.
I'll show some more detail about that.
These are the packet sizes that are
supported by 1394 at the various speeds.
The top shows 100, 200, and 400.
These are the sizes that
have been set for years.
Nothing has changed there.
As we move to the higher
speeds that 1394B provides,
the packet sizes keep going up.
For isochronous, they continue to double.
For asynchronous, it's clamped at 4096.
And this was done because
it's generally felt that with
the optimizations in 1394B,
which eliminate, for example,
all of the idle gaps on the bus,
it's no longer necessary to
keep doubling the packet size
to keep the performance up.
And it's inconvenient if
packets have to be retargeted.
And they're, for example, 16 kilobytes.
That's an awful lot of data to
throw away if just one bit went bad.
So 4096 is the cap for
asynchronous packets,
but that should in no way limit
the performance that you can get
with asynchronous packets on 1394B.
I talked about topology.
This figure shows a self-ID packet.
This is not actually unique to 1394B.
They look like this in 1394A also.
The self-ID packet is the very
most primitive level of information
that we receive about each device,
telling us how it's hooked into the bus.
For example, on the right-hand side, P0,
P1, P2 represent the first three ports
on the device and whether or not they
are connected to some other device.
By receiving all these
packets and doing some math,
we can figure out who's plugged into who.
[Transcript missing]
There's actually two ways to do this.
You can read the port registers or
you can simply start sending packets
to the device at faster and faster
speeds and find out what works.
Each one has its advantages.
It's possible that you'll
see both in use on the bus.
This is not something
you'll ever have to do.
We will do this in the family,
but you may see this activity in Firebug
and you may wonder what's going on.
Okay, the next section we'll
go through very quickly.
It's the how-tos.
I've got a device.
I want to write software.
Where do I start?
Storage, probably the most common.
As I described earlier,
we have a built-in
driver for mass storage.
Most FireWire storage devices
don't need more software.
As you move above FireWire,
the layer you hit first is called
IOFireWireSerialBusProtocolTransport.
Excuse me.
and there's many layers above that.
If necessary, if you're adding some
vendor unique feature,
you could possibly subclass
that text or subclass other
parts of the storage class.
But in most cases,
you can just use our built-in driver.
If you're doing custom apps,
maybe some kind of jukebox controller,
SCSITaaskUserClient is
probably the way to go.
Just two hours ago,
there was a session on the
new disk recording APIs.
If you're doing
CD-ROM burning or something,
that's probably your easiest way to go.
If all else fails,
you can use the SBP-2 APIs directly,
preferably from the user client,
or if you're a bootable disk,
maybe you might have
to go into the kernel.
But we expect most people
won't have to do that.
DV, the other really common device.
Apple has a built-in DV driver.
It sends and receives
DV in various formats,
NTSC, PAL, standard definition,
extended play.
It has device control.
It's all available through
QuickTime or through the user clients.
I mentioned on Monday that we had
open-sourced io-firewire-dv KEXT.
That's actually obsolete because
we've moved it into user space,
but now you can see how it all works,
and what's in user space, of course,
is also similar.
The name changes to
io-fwdv-components in Jaguar.
The highest level API is the
QuickTime Sequence Grabber.
If you're trying to import video,
that's what you should be using.
But you could also talk to it through the
ABC UserClient to have a lower level API.
Or if you had to,
the services are there in the kernel.
You could subclass them there or you
could use the plain FireWire UserClient.
For webcam-type devices, as I said,
we have a standard driver in Jaguar.
If that's not to your liking,
you probably want to use the
plain FireWire user client,
starting with the sample
code that's in our SDK.
But be advised,
it's not a good example of
good QuickTime practice,
so study QuickTime.
Scanners.
Most FireWire scanners use
the SBP-2 architecture.
You should probably consider using
Apple's image capture architecture.
If you need to work at a lower level,
since your device is probably SAM,
consider using SCSITaaskUserClient.
Falling back,
you could use the SBP-2 user
client or even the plain FireWire
user client if you had to.
In no case should you go into the kernel.
Scanners are not something
that we need to boot.
They're not kernel resources,
so don't put scanner
drivers in the kernel.
Audio.
As I said earlier,
we are working on a lot of audio areas.
If you want to do software
for FireWire audio devices,
please get in touch with us
because we would like to find out
what you're doing and help mold
our services to meet your needs.
Printers like scanners tend to be SAM,
so you can probably use
SCSITaaskUserclient,
but there are some deviations out there.
You could use the SBP-2 user client.
If you want to use PPDT,
also known as IEEE 1394.3,
you should be able to use
the SBP-2 user client,
though you'll have to add
a layer on top of that.
Please let us know if you're doing this,
because we aren't aware of any
products that actually use this.
You could use the plain
FireWire user client if you
have some really custom printer.
Like scanners,
these do not belong in the kernel.
In fact,
I think it would be impossible because
you'd have to hook into PrintCenter,
and that's an application-level service.
Still cameras.
There are cameras from Kodak,
Nikon that take still images
but transfer over FireWire.
On Monday I went at length as to why
they do this instead of using USB2.
Here we'll talk about
driver support for them.
We already support some in
iPhoto and image capture,
so you may not have to write anything.
We are working on more.
So if you have a still camera
and want to write software,
please get in touch with us.
We might be able to
save you a lot of time.
If you have an SBP-2 type camera, again,
SCSITaaskUserclient or perhaps
the plain SBP-2 user client.
If you're not using SBP-2,
you really should be.
These cameras move a lot of data.
That's why they're on FireWire, not USB.
And SBP-2 is the good high-performance
protocol for doing that.
That's what we support best.
If you have a camcorder that
also doubles as a still camera,
it probably wants to use
asynchronous connections.
We're working on that,
but you could access it
through the ABC user client.
And if all else fails...
If all else fails,
use the FireWire user client.
Again, stay out of the kernel.
Cameras are not any
kind of kernel resource.
If you have a PCI card or a Cardbus card,
we hope developers will be making,
for example, 1394B PCI cards for all of
our G4 towers out there.
We support open HCI interfaces
if they comply with the spec,
like I talked about earlier.
If you have one that
doesn't and it's broken,
well, you need to get one that works.
It's that simple.
If, on the other hand,
you are modifying OHCI silicon
because you are really clever and
you're adding some special function,
that may be okay.
Talk with us.
We'd like to know about that and
see what we can do to help you.
Hubs.
On FireWire,
there is no software for hubs.
This is different from, say, USB.
Hubs just work.
They just repeat packets.
So, if you want to make a hub,
just get a good hardware
designer and off you go.
Protocols.
This is one of the
most interesting areas.
Protocols are things like
TCP/IP or certain kinds of audio.
This is where you want to send
and receive packets on Firewire,
but not necessarily
just to a single device.
You may be communicating with
lots of folks out on the bus.
Rather than loading yourself
over and over again for every
device that you want to talk to,
if you use the local node,
you can talk to everyone
on the bus at once.
The Firewire user client
can talk to the local node,
or you can do it
directly from the kernel.
If you're going down this path,
we'd like to know,
because it's something we
haven't explored very much,
and we'd like to help you do that.
If you have some innovative
device that doesn't match
anything I just talked about,
you've probably figured this out by now,
use the highest level API that you can,
preferably one of the
user clients or above.
If all else fails,
use the FireWire user client.
Anything you can do on FireWire,
you can do with the FireWire user client,
although it may not be easy.
And again, stay out of the kernel
if you possibly can.
Okay, we're almost done.
Last section is a recap
of developer resources.
Apple, most of you already know this,
but we have a very
strong developer program.
There's lots of stuff available.
Please visit developer.apple.com and take
a look if you're not familiar with it.
Specific to FireWire,
we are having a plug fest tonight
during the Apple Campus Bash.
You can go into the quad and get
some beer and then bring your
devices over to the garage room.
It's better than it sounds.
It's above the cafeteria.
It's a fairly large room.
Bring your FireWire devices.
We will be plugging them in to Mac OS X.
We'll try to get as many
connected as we can.
You can meet with the FireWire engineers.
The whole team will be there.
You can meet with other
FireWire developers.
It should be fun.
The 1394 Trade Association has
plug-fests.
I talked about these on Monday,
if you don't already know.
These are different.
This is two or three days
of really focused testing.
You can get a ton of data,
and you meet a lot of people
who don't come to Apple events,
so you can get a much more
broad collection of data.
Here's the schedule for
ones that are upcoming.
We go to all of these.
We get lots of great data.
You should go to these, too.
If you want this kind of testing,
but the schedule doesn't meet your
needs or you need some more privacy,
consider contacting Quantum Parametrics.
That's the company contracted by
the Trade Association to provide
some of the tools being used.
We hold FireWire kitchens.
It's three or four days where we
get the engineering team together
with a collection of developers.
We have tutorials on the
latest things we've added,
hands-on development and debugging,
and sometimes we give some
related presentations,
whatever is timely.
We do these two or three times a year.
Often we do it when a
new SDK has come out.
If you'd like to
participate in one of these,
use the contact information at the end.
Here's the roadmap.
Those first two are in the past.
There's the plugfest I told you about.
And tomorrow morning at 9 a.m.
we have a feedback form where
you can come tell us what we're
doing that you like or don't like
or really say anything you like.
If you'd like somebody to talk to,
FireWire at Apple.com is
the primary mail address.
That goes to Guillermo Ortiz,
who will be up here in just
a moment to handle the Q&A.
He is the technology manager for
FireWire in developer relations.
We have a public mailing list.
You're all welcome to subscribe.
A lot of people outside the
Apple community subscribe to it.
Visit that web page.
Also, especially if you're
into SCSITaaskUserClient,
there is a mass storage mailing list.
It has a slightly different
subscription mechanism.
You can find it here.
Thank you.
All of our SDKs are posted for free
public download on the web starting at
this page which has other links as well.
The new document I mentioned earlier,
Working with FireWire Device Interfaces,
is available on the web.
You may want to visit the
1394 Trade Association to
learn about PlugFests.
Their URL is here.
Finally, you can go to the IEEE itself
if you need the standards.